Acute coronary Syndrome (ACS) is a leading cause of mortality and morbidity in the Arabian Gulf. In this
study, the in-hospital mortality among patients admitted with ACS to Arabian Gulf hospitals is predicted
using a comprehensive modeling framework that combines powerful machine learning methods such as
Support Vector Machine (SVM), Naïve Bayes (NB), Artificial Neural Networks (NN), and Decision Trees
(DT). The performance of the machine learning methods is compared to that of the performance of a
commonly used statistical method, namely, logistic regression (LR). The study follows the current practice
of computing mortality risk using risk scores such as the Global Registry of Acute Coronary Events
(GRACE) score which has not been validated for Arabian Gulf patients. Cardiac registry data of 7000
patients from 65 hospitals located in Arabian Gulf countries are used for the study. A k-fold (k=10)
validation is utilized to generate training and validation subsamples from the dataset and specialized
methods such as Random Under Sampling (RUS) and Synthetic Minority Over Sampling Technique
(SMOTE) are employed to overcome the data imbalance problem. The methods, RUS and SMOTE are
essential for this study since the imbalanced data are common within in-hospital survival in contrast to in-
hospital mortality in the GRACE dataset. This aspect of the use of balancing methods to remedy the problem
of imbalanced data is often ignored. The results from the analysis showed that the performance of all
prediction models (SV, NB, NN, DT) measured using standard prediction metric, Area-Under-Curve
(AUC) was found superior to LR. Further, the specificity estimates for all methods improved using under
sampling and over sampling methods, RUS and SMOTE, respectively. Another salient feature of the study
is the application of Information fusion (IF) based technique for sensitivity analysis. The IF method
synthesizes all methods to collectively identify the most important predictors or medical conditions. Finally,
another method is implemented to further enhance the analysis by grouping the predictors using fuzzy c-
mean clustering. Thus, the research not only proposes a comprehensive hybrid approach yielding superior
prediction outcomes, but also presented a unified robust collective framework consisting of unbalancing
treatments, information fusion, and fuzzy c-clustering for identification of the predictors for the in-hospital
mortality due to ACS. The insights into the predictors provided by the study can positively impact the
mortality rates in ACS patients.